Programming and Systems Development Lab Exam 

You will sit the actual lab exam during your scheduled lab session on Thursday 31 October, or during a different time by consultation with the Teaching Office. 
During the exam 
During the lab exam, you will use one of the lab machines in its default configuration. When you come into the exam, you will be able to bring nothing with you. You are also not allowed to access any previously written documents or code files from your home drive or the web. If you do, it will be considered plagiarism. 
As in a normal examination, communication between candidates during the laboratory exam is strictly forbidden. 
A candidate who wishes to print a document during the exam should summon an invigilator, who will collect it from the printer and deliver it. 
Name 
Place of Birth 
Agatha Christie 
Torquay 
A candidate may leave early, but only after summoning an invigilator, who will ensure that submission has taken place. Any candidate who experiences a hardware or software problem during the examination should summon an invigilator at once. 
Leave the laboratory quietly when you are done; the exam may still be in progress for other groups. 
Overview 
This exam consists of two parts: part 1 requires you to write a Python program, and part 2 requires you to write a Java program. The instructions, allocated marks, and submission instructions are given below for each part. Note that each part has a total of 24 marks allocated for correctness, as indicated; in addition, 1 mark for each part will be allocated for appropriate coding style (commenting, formatting, variable names, etc).  
Java 
In this lab, you will create a set of classes representing playable characters in a video game, as well as a class representing a player of that video game. The following are the main features that you will implement – the remainder of this lab sheet describes in more detail how the classes should be created. 
Every Game Character has two properties: a name (e.g., "Superman") and a set of powers (e.g., for Superman, this might include Flying, Invincibility, Speed, and Energy Blast). 
A Player of a video game has a set of game characters which they have already purchased. 
During the game, a player will encounter a series of levels – and each level requires a set of characters with particular powers. For example, one level might need characters with powers including Flight, Strength, and Science. To begin such a level, a player must choose a set of characters that supply all of the necessary powers. For example, if a level needs character with Flight, Strength, and Science, the player might choose Superman (to provide Flight and Strength) along with Doctor Octopus (to provide Science). If a player does not have characters that are able to supply the necessary powers, they are not able to start the level. 
Example 
Assume that the player has the following characters in their set: 
Robin (providing Weapons) 
Starfire (providing Flight and Energy Blast) 
Cyborg (providing Strength and Weapons) 
Beast Boy (providing Transformation) 
Raven (providing Magic) 
The following are the game characters the player should choose in various circumstances 
If the required powers are Weapons and Strength, they should choose Cyborg 
If the required powers are Flight, Strength, and Transformation, they should choose Starfire, Cyborg, and Beast Boy. 
If the required powers are Transformation, Magic, and Science, then this player cannot start the level as they do not have any characters that provide all of the required powers. 
  
Java Task 1: Power (2 marks) 
Note about implementation: all classes created in this exam should be put in the superhero package. 
You should create an enumerated type Power with the following values: 
CLONING, COMPUTER, ENERGY_BLAST, FLIGHT, INVINCIBILITY, MAGIC, MAGNETISM, 
SCIENCE, SMALL, SPEED, STRENGTH, TELEPATHY, TRANSFORMATION, WEAPONS, WATER 
Java Task 2: GameCharacter (6 marks) 
You should then create a class GameCharacter representing a game character including the following properties: 
name (a String) 
powers (a set of Power objects) 
You should create a constructor to set the value of the above fields with the following signature (note that this constructor uses varargs for its final parameter): 
public GameCharacter(String name, int cost, Power... powers) 
In addition, your GameCharacter class must satisfy the following requirements: 
Your class must be immutable – that is, it should not be possible to change any of the fields of the class in any way after it is created. 
The class must have a complete set of get methods for all parameters, but no set methods o Be sure that none of your get methods violate the immutability of your class 
You should provide appropriate implementations of equals(), hashCode(), and toString(). 
o It is fine to use the auto-generated versions of equals() and hashCode() if you want, but you must write your own (non-auto-generated) toString() method. 
You must write descriptive Javadoc comments for the class and for all class members (fields and methods). 
  
Java Task 3: Player (6 marks) 
Once your GameCharacter class is finished, you should implement a Player class to represent a player of the game, making use of the GameCharacter class defined above. Player should a single field: 
The set of game characters that they currently own (represented as GameCharacter objects) – you can choose whatever data type you want for this field 
Player should also have the following methods: 
A constructor that initialises the set of characters correctly • An appropriately named method to add a character to the set 
A get method to retrieve the field value.  
Java Task 4: chooseCharacters (10 marks) 
In your GameCharacter class, implement one additional public method, as follows: 
• public Set<GameCharacter> chooseCharacters(Power... neededPowers) 
Note that you are free to add any number of private helper methods that you want, but the above should be the only public method in the class other than the constructor and the get method. 
This method should implement the behaviour shown above in the example: given a set of powers, this should return the set of characters required to provide all of the requested powers, or null if it is not possible to provide the powers. If no set of characters can be found to cover all of the required powers, this method should return null. If more than one set of characters can provide the required powers, any valid set of characters can be returned (e.g., in the example, a level requiring Weapons and Magic could return Raven and Robin, or Raven and Cyborg). 
Java submission 
Ensure your submission files are named exactly as they are supposed to – i.e., Power.java, 
GameCharacter.java, Player.java. Also be sure that all classes are in the superhero package. 
Go to your moodle account, and submit all of the above files at the appropriate submission link: 
Moodle > Programming and System Design > Lab Exam > Java Submission 
